let's now talk about how some of the
lower courts have interpreted the
standing Doctrine in data breach cases
and as we talked about earlier the lower
courts are not unified in their approach
to standing requirements for data breach
lawsuits some courts only allow the
lawsuit to proceed if the defendant has
demonstrated that a breach already led
to actual harm such as identity theft
while other courts have found standing
when plaintiffs concretely allege that
the breach could reasonably lead to
Future harm
generally speaking article 3 standing
injury and fact has proved to be the
most significant hurdle for data breach
lawsuits and in cases in which standing
has been found the plaintiffs generally
make substantial and concrete
demonstrations of injury
so let's begin by talking about some of
the courts some of the cases that have
taken a broad view of injury in fact and
so let's begin with the case of crotner
versus Starbucks in that case an
unencrypted Starbucks laptop containing
nearly a hundred thousand current and
former Starbucks employees names
addresses and Social Security numbers
was stolen
three current and former employees filed
a putative class action lawsuit against
the company alleging claims of
negligence and breach of implied
contract
the first plane of claimed that she
spent a substantial amount of time
monitoring her Banking and retirement
accounts because of the breach because
she was fearful that they would be
accessed and money would be taken
the second plane of claimed that he has
spent and continues to spend substantial
amount of time checking his 401k in bank
accounts and has generalized anxiety and
stress regarding the situation
and the third plaintiff stated that
within a few months of the laptop theft
he was alerted by his bank of a third
party's attempt to open a bank account
with his social security number
The District Court dismissed the case
finding that the plaintiffs failed to
demonstrate the injury necessary to
establish standing however the ninth
circuit reversed the dismissal finding
that the plaintiff's complaint
sufficiently alleged injury because they
have alleged a credible threat of real
and immediate harm stemming from the
threat of a laptop containing their
unencrypted personal data
the crotner case quickly made it easier
for data breach plaintiffs to establish
standing in the ninth circuit because it
took this very Broad View
and in fact in 2014 the U.S District
Court for the southern district of
California found that plaintiffs had
standing to bring a class-action suit
against Sony when there was a breach of
the network that stored personal and
financial information of PlayStation
Network customers we have we've talked
about this case before this was the
initial Sony breach before the big Sony
breach that was the subject of our first
lecture
and so at least in the ninth circuit
this sort of fear of future harm
stemming from a breach is gonna tend to
be enough to constitute standing
another case uh pisciata I think is how
it's pronounced versus Old National Bank
Corp is another case in which there was
a broad view of the injury and fact
requirement in that case two plaintiffs
brought a putative class action lawsuit
against a bank whose website was
allegedly hacked the hack enabled the
hacker to obtain a great deal of
personal information about thousands of
customers including their names their
social security numbers their birth
dates Financial account numbers and even
their mother's maiden name which I'm
sure many of you know is often a
security question
the plaintiffs didn't allege that they
had suffered a financial loss because of
the breach
it did state that the plaintiffs have
incurred in expenses in order to prevent
their confidential personal information
from being used and that they will
continue to incur expenses in the future
the plane of sought compensation for all
economic and emotional damages suffered
as a result of the defendant's acts
which were negligent in breach of
implied contract or in breach of
contract and we will learn that those
are all three of those are different
claims when we get to the more
substantive part of this unit
the defendant the bang moved to dismiss
the lawsuit at the district court level
once again the district court granted
the bank's motion to dismiss the court
reason that the plaintiffs did not allow
recognizable injury in fact and they
said that the court said that the
expenditure of money to monitor one's
credit is not the result of any present
injury but rather the anticipation of
future injury that has not yet
materialized
the seventh circuit ultimately upheld
the dismissal of the case however they
disagreed with the District Court's
ruling in regards to standing the the
seventh circuit concluded that the data
breach plaintiff can establish injury in
fact by alleging a threat of future harm
or by an act which harms the plaintiff
only by increasing the risk of future
harm that the plaintiff would have
otherwise faced absent the defendant's
actions
um so basically what they're saying is
for other reasons the court dismissed
the case but on the standing requirement
that alleging this fear of future harm
that would not have happened if the
defendant hadn't
done you know hadn't done something
wrong they weren't negligent or whatever
that that's enough
and in fact 31 courts across the country
have relied on the pisciata ruling to
find standing in data breach cases so
this is being widely used by courts not
only within the seventh circuit but also
outside of the seventh circuit as well
as kind of persuasive authority to
bolster the Court's argument
that being said some courts have taken a
narrow view of injury in fact and have
not gone quite so far as the ninth or
seventh circuits have when it comes to
um allowing standing in data breach
cases
so for example there's the case of um
Riley versus Ceridian Corp which went to
Great Lengths to distinguish
um that particular case from crotner and
pisciata in order to hold that there is
no standing and so in Riley the
plaintiffs filed a putative class action
lawsuit against their employer's payroll
Processing Company Ceridian after
Ceridian experienced a data breach that
exposed the personal and financial data
of approximately 27 000 people
there was no evidence that the hacker
read or copied the breached information
The District Court granted ceridian's
motion to dismiss for lack of standing
and the U.S court of appeals for the
third circuit affirmed the dismissal
holding that allegations of an increased
risk of identity theft resulting from a
security breach are therefore
insufficient to secure standing
the reasoning was that the hypothetical
harm and nothing more doesn't establish
an injury in fact the court said that it
could not describe how appellants will
be injured in this case without
beginning our Exploration with the word
if if the hacker read copied and
understood the Hacked information and if
the hacker attempts to use the
information and if he does so
successfully only then will Helens have
suffered an injury and some federal
district courts have adopted similar
reasoning for data breach cases holding
that the mere risk of identity theft
after a breach without an additional
showing of imminent or actional harm is
insufficient to establish an incident
and injury in fact
the third circuit did acknowledge the
pisciata and kratner rulings and that
those courts found that data breach
victims had standing to sue but
differentiated those cases because the
harm was more imminent and certainly
impending than the harm alleged by the
plaintiffs suing Ceridian
and so this is why it's difficult to say
that there is a true circuit split
in this context because the third
circuit did something clever here in
order to avoid creating a circuit split
now whether they did so intentionally or
not I I don't know
um but
they went out of their way to
acknowledge how the facts of Ceridian
make the legal conclusion different as
opposed to just arguing that pisciata
and kratner were wrongly decided and
therefore they weren't going to follow
it
and you know I want to read from you
read to you from the opinion exactly
what the court said so you can kind of
get an understanding of their reasoning
here
um so you know as as I said before the
the the uh Court in Ceridian argued that
that case was different from pisciata
and crotner because those cases
presented a more imminent and certainly
impending harm than the harm alleged by
the plane of suing Ceridian and then
here I'm going to quote from the opinion
uh the third circuit said and I quote in
pisciata there was evidence that the
Hacker's intrusion was sophisticated
intentional and malicious
in propner someone attempted to open a
bank account with a plaintiff's
information following the physical theft
of the laptop
here there is no evidence that the
intrusion was intentional or malicious
in appellants have alleged no misuse and
therefore no injury indeed no
identifiable taking occurred all that is
known is that a firewall was penetrated
appellant string of hypothetical
injuries do not meet the requirements of
an actual or imminent injury
so basically and and that's the end of
the quote by the way so basically what
the court was saying is that a data
breach plaintiff can't have standing
unless there has been some indication of
potential harm like an attempt to open a
credit account or a high level of
sophistication like in the um like in
pisciata
so the distinction you know
um the the author of our textbook argues
is a bit artificial
um and suggests that it might be easier
for data breach plaintiffs to establish
standing in certain circuits uh such as
the ninth or the seventh and and harder
in others such as the third I think I
would tend to agree uh with the author
of our case book Professor coseff
um
that this does seem a bit artificial I
mean at the end of the day I struggle to
find much of a difference between Riley
V Ceridian and pisciata and crotner I
don't necessarily think that the third
circuit their distinction is totally
inaccurate I mean obviously in crotner
we had an actual attempt to use stolen
information and in pisciata there
obviously was information that the
hacker uh was sophisticated and
intentional and malicious and here it
seems that uh there was just indication
of a breach in in Ceridian
what I struggle to understand about the
third circuit's reasoning is in what
world is someone breaching a firewall
not doing it for malicious purposes like
I I almost wonder like why we can't
infer malicious intent when someone
breaches a firewall I mean I am not
nearly as technically Savvy as I'm sure
many of you are but I imagine it's
pretty difficult to accidentally
penetrate the firewall of a
sophisticated company
um and if you're not doing it for like
penetration testing purposes uh you know
as kind of like an ethical hacking sort
of situation where you're testing the
security of the system
why else would it have been an issue
um think about that I really actually be
curious to get your thoughts on it um
uh because I struggle with kind of the
third circuit's distinction here I'd be
curious to hear your thoughts on what
you think about it as well
so that concludes our conversation on
the injury and fact component of
standing we've seen how the Supreme
Court has laid out some kind of ground
rules that really aren't all that
helpful to be completely honest uh and
left the door open for other things uh
that these lower courts are now
struggling to wrestle with we've seen
how some circuits interpret injury in
fact broadly While others interpret it
narrowly making it harder for our
plaintiffs to establish injury next we
will move into the Fairly traceable
component of the standing test and the
redressibility component of the standing
test I will do those in the next video
so I'll stop this one here and pick up
in the next video
